x264 for professional video work

An in-depth guide by Space Banana

x264 is the most popular and successful encoder for the H.264 video
encoding format. It has a very wide feature set and takes advantage of
everything H.264 supports, such as lossless compression, zero
subsampling, RGB color format, custom keyframe intervals and much more.
Besides the feature-set, the encoder is very customizable, with many
encoding parameters, but what really sells it for most people is how
efficient it is. x264 is a very fast encoder, while also being highly
efficient in compression, being able to encode videos at high quality
and low bitrates simultaneously. This is a huge deal for delivering
videos, especially to the internet. Sure, you could use an H.265 or VP9
encoder instead for even higher compression efficiency, but these are
really slow to encode, especially VP9 with its official codec library
\"libvpx\".

This guide will lead you to how you can professionally use x264 for
footage, archiving and editing. The guide focuses on encoding video with
FFmpeg and all parameters and arguments mentioned are for FFmpeg. The
encoder libraries used are libx264 and libx264rgb.

Encoding performance
^\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_^

Despite its efficient compression, x264 is a very lightweight and
optimized encoder. You can use x264 in realtime recordings with a modern
budget CPU nowadays, but what if it\'s still not enough for you? There
are multiple ways to optimize your video encoding, but the easiest and
most straightforward way to optimize x264 is by choosing a lightweight
preset. x264 comes with multiple encoding presets which define encoding
parameters to optimize the video encoding for either performance, at the
cost of lower compression efficiency and quality, or the opposite.

You can set your preset with the \"-preset\" or \"-preset:v\"
parameters.

![](Pictures/1000327800003E800000258009BA326E40F320DE.svg){width="9.999cm"
height="5.99cm"}![](Pictures/100036A900003E9A00002342BDEBED3902508E7E.svg){width="9.999cm"
height="5.62cm"}The following benchmark uses a CRF-encoded video to
determine how compression efficiency and speed vary throughout the
presets:

The graph on the left tells us how much the compression efficiency
improves throughout the presets. Since the video is CRF-encoded, quality
is constant, and bitrate is the one who varies to achieve that quality.
We can see that beyond the veryfast preset there aren\'t noticeable
gains in compression efficiency, while ultrafast is extremely
inefficient in comparison.

The graph on the right tells us how heavy these presets are in their
encoding speed. As we raise the preset, the encoding slows down almost
linearly.

We can conclude that, since speed worsens significantly but compression
quality barely changes, that superfast is the most efficient preset when
you compare the difference between compression and speed. Veryfast
should be used for even better compressions, but it\'s not recommended
to be used in realtime. Ultrafast is ideal for realtime recording due to
its performance, but be aware that bitrates will be much higher for the
same quality target.

Compression and data preservation
^\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_^

H.264 supports CRF bitrate control and lossless encoding, and so does
x264. This makes x264 a very good candidate for producing video with
significant quality and data preservation. For more serious workflows,
it\'s advised to use CRF bitrate control rather than CBR.

CBR

CBR stands for constant bitrate. This is the most common and
straightforward method of controlling the video bitrate: you set a
bitrate target and the video\'s bitrate will stay in that target the
whole time, with just slight fluctiations. Quality differs as the
information in the video changes.

CRF

CRF stands for control rate factor. This bitrate control method sets a
quality target that the encoder must obey, and bitrate varies
unpredictably throughout the video, depending on how much data the video
needs to preserve enough of the current information to stay in the
determined quality target. Video and encoder parameters also change the
behavior if they interfere with the amount of information the video
needs.

Unless you have strict storage limits, you should generally use CRF. It
guarantees a quality target, regardless of your video and encoding
settings. Bitrate differs unpredictability, but so would happen on a
lossless video.

Use the argument -crf to determine the CRF value. The accepted value
range is 0 to 51. 0 produces lossless video. The higher the value, the
lower the quality target and the lower the video\'s bitrate will be.

Color preservation
^\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_^

Both x264 and H.264 support RGB and YUV at different sampling modes. To
preserve colors in video, you should use at least as much sampling as
the original footage. If you are recording footage from scratch, you
should use as least subsampling as you can. For example, instead of
using the color format YUV 4:2:0, you can use 4:2:2 or 4:4:4. You can
also encode your video in RGB which doesn\'t have any subsampling of
color, just like YUV 4:4:4.

You can set the color format for your encode with \"-pix_fmt\". For RGB
on x264, use the \"libx264rgb\" encoder instead.

Fast and lightweight
playback^\ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_^

If you are going to use your footage in video editing, VFX and similar
tasks, one of the most important factors to keep in mind is how easy and
lightweight it is to decode your video. The more lightweight it is, the
higher your playback and editing performance. H.264 is a delivery
format, and so it doesn\'t have nearly as much playback performance as
more appropriate formats, but you can still optimize your video a lot in
x264.

First, you can quickly squeeze more decode performance out of your
encodes with the -tune parameter. Use the \"-tune fastdecode\" argument
(this will already be used if your preset is ultrafast).

By default x264 uses interframe compression. In interframe compression,
frames share identical pixels\' data with each other to optimize the
video\'s file size. This sharing happens in an interval, between what\'s
called keyframes. Keyframes are frames which do not share or are shared
data with any other frame.

While this technique is very good to lower bitrate requirements, it\'s
very heavy to decode. Lower the keyframe interval of your encode with
the -g parameter. \"-g 60\" will lower the interval to 60 frames. If you
want to fully disable interframe compression, use \"-g 0\".

Among the frames that share pixel data, we have b-frames. These frames
share data for frames both after and before them, and they are also a
bottleneck in your playback performance. To disable b-frames, use \"-bf
0\".

Conclusion
^\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_^

H.264 is very capable of being optimized for serious work rather than
delivering your video to the web and similar platforms, and x264
facilitates this workflow. The ideal encoder parameters would then be:

-c:v libx264rgb -preset:v superfast -tune fastdecode -g 0 -bf 0 -crf 0

Of course, you might require even better encoding performance, so you
can use the ultrafast preset instead.

If you want to encode in YUV instead, you can do so by using libx264
instead:

-c:v libx264 -preset:v superfast -tune fastdecode -g 0 -bf 0 -crf 0
-pix_fmt yuv444p.

If you do not want to produce a lossless video due to storage
limitations, you can use a higher CRF value. Values between 1 and 10 are
indistinguishable from 0 for the most part and are very optimal for
video work.
